The Gleason Scoring System is an important criterion for pathological grading of prostate cancer, which evaluates the morphological and structural characteristics of glands in prostate cancer tissue for grading. Accurate Gleason grading is a prerequisite and key for the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of prostate cancer. Due to the complexity of prostate pathological images, traditional prostate Gleason grading methods rely on the experience of pathologists and microscopic observation, which is not only time-consuming and costly, but also susceptible to misdiagnosis and missed diagnosis due to subjective factors, resulting in low diagnostic accuracy. At the same time, if the prostate pathology images of the hospital are not shared, it will form a data silos, but sharing will create another new problem - data security. In response to the above two issues, this dissertation proposes a Gleason automatic grading method for prostate pathology images based on Federated Learning. The main research contents are as follows:
(1) To address the issue of low accuracy in current prostate cancer diagnosis methods, this dissertation proposes a ViT like multi instance module ViTLikeMIL based on Vision Mamba and EfficientNet feature fusion. ViTLikeMIL has a network structure similar to ViT, but with only two layers, and the module can learn the features of multiple image blocks, and finally output a mixed label four classification result through a linear layer. Firstly, concatenate the image blocks into a WSI; Then, extract the contours and superpixel blocks of the WSI; Next, use Vision Mamba and EfficientNet to extract features from the WSI by superpixel block; Finally, concatenate the features and input them into the ViTLikeMIL module for training. This dissertation validates the proposed method on the SCICAPv2 dataset, obtaining accuracy, precision, sensitivity, specificity, F1 score, and AUC of 86.18%, 87.27%, 77.42%, 92.22%, 82.05%, and 0.9595, respectively, which are superior to existing models and improve classification accuracy.
(2) This dissertation proposes a model training strategy based on Federated Learning to address data silos and data security issues. Firstly, create data consumers on the central server and create n data owners on each of the n clients; Then, the training set is evenly divided into n parts using a Stratified K-fold Cross Validation method and saved to all clients; Next, the data consumers initiates a data usage request to the data owner. After the data owner approves the request, the data consumers can only use authorized data on the client side, but does not have access permissions; Finally, the central server distributes the initialized model to the clients, who train the model locally and use the Early Stopping method to determine if the model has converged. After the model converges, it is uploaded to the central server for model aggregation. The central server and clients iteratively exchange model weight parameters to ultimately converge the model. The accuracy, precision, sensitivity, specificity, F1 score, and AUC obtained using Federated Learning training strategy on the SCICAPv2 dataset were 84.86%, 81.96%, 80.64%, 87.78%, 81.30%, and 0.9121, respectively. The model solved the problems of data silos and data security while maintaining almost the same performance as centralized training. At the same time, the communication frequency between the central server and the clients has been reduced from 45 times to 12 times, improving communication efficiency.